Borderlands 3 Critique: No Guns, No Glory

INTRO: 

Borderlands is a guilty pleasure of mine.  Think of it as the Taco Bell of FPS
games. It's not good for you, but when it's 2 a.m and you've got a
craving, it hits the spot. With that analogy in mind, how does the latest entry
in this franchise hold up?


STORY:

--play scream montage-- 

I generally ignore stories in my critiques, since I focus on a game's mechanics
and combat. However, there are games that are hellbent at shoving in as much of
their awful writing as possible, to the point where I can't simply ignore it.
Borderlands 3 is the prime example of this.

From the main story to the side quests, your senses are being constantly
assaulted by noise, especially from its obnoxious characters. While this was
admittedly a problem in previous entries, there were some redeeming aspects to
the writing, like Handsome Jack's clever taunts or the Sanctuary's somber
atmosphere following Roland's death.  Here, every returning character has been
flanderized to the point of being cariacatures of their former selves. And
that's not mentioning the new cast of fools like The Calypso Twins and Ava, who
give me brain aneurysms everytime they open their mouths.

And to make things more painful, the game is obsessed with its dank memes and
relentlessly bombards you with them. Let me show you how agonizing these are to
sit through.

-- play memes quest and jabber moaning--

I suspect these are all attempts to cover up the game's trashfire of a story,
which hinges upon major actors being complete idiots and dying because they
conviently forgot their god powers existed. These issues are all exacerbated
because the game has multiple classes and a NG+ option for scaled quest
rewards. So if you want to max out all four vault hunters, you could be
potentially slogging through the campaign eight times over. 

Even if you mute the dialogue, the pacing's still fucked, as you have to wait
for everyone to leisurely finish their conversations, many of which drag on for
minutes. The lack of any option to skip the story and dialogue on subsequent
playthroughs kills any desire I have to farm quest-related gear. However, even
if we had that option, the campaign's progression would still be all over the
place, but more on that later. 

GAMEPLAY: 

In series tradition, the introduction is terrible. The tutorial patronizingly
assumes you've never played a video game before and has you perform basic tasks
like jumping over a two foot ravine.  All of this occurs while you cringe at
Claptrap's dialogue. Now, this intro could've worked if the game had any
self-awareness and poked fun at its dull tutorial, like in Far Cry 3: Blood
Dragon, but it's all played completely straight here.

Thankfully, after enduring this shit for about 40 minutes, the game opens up
and you're free to explore Pandora to a limited extent. And here we enter
Borderlands 3's core gameplay loop: vehicular exploration, combat, loot, and
talking to Lilith. Endgame content such as Mayhem mode and annointments will
covered in a later section.

With exploration, you drive around in one of three vehicles: the technical,
outrunner, and cyclone. The technical is slow and tanky while the cyclone is
small and agile. The outrunner sits in between two, offering up balanced health
and speed. However, you will never want to use anything but the cyclone. For
starters, the technical and outrunner have terrible handling, as their massive
hitboxes cause them to easily collide with environmental geometry. Furthermore,
if your car blows up, another one can be spawned at a nearby catch-a-ride for
no cost. So the extra durability of the outrunner and technical are worthless
when it's trivial to replace vehicles. 

In general, car combat is unrewarding. The experience you gain from blowing up
enemies while driving is miniscule. Plus, you're limited to three weapons per
vehicle class, most of which take longer to kill than any of the guns you have
on foot. Therefore, the only real usecase for vehicles is to travel from
location to location, which the cyclone does best. 

This all ties into my major issue with exploration: it's pointless. All of the
planets are devoid of life or any meaningful activity. You can occasionally
fight off some COV technicals, but it's never rewarding.  Alternatively, you
can hijack a vehicle and bring it to a catch-a-ride to unlock parts for your
cars, but these are often sidegrades to what you start out with. 

You can also go on scavenger hunts for loot stashes, but the drops
are often no better than what you get from enemies.  Plus, you have to listen
to more of the game's obnoxious writing.  Ocassionally, you can find
minibosses on certain tilesets, but they are not guaranteed to appear. So if
you want to fight them, you'll often have to reload the game until they spawn
in. Plus, if you've not hit the level cap, you'll need to go back and refarm
that boss every five or so levels for updated gear.

Finally, side missions will send you to all corners of the current map on fetch
quests in exchange for experience. Most weapons received this way tend to be
equivalent to standard loot, but with some additional effect on top, such as a
percent chance to do extra damage.  That said, very few of these are memorable,
and some like Kill Killavolt can drag on for up to an hour.   

I'm disappointed that there are no activities that make interesting use of the
maps, such as dynamically generated races or badass enemy hunts. That way,
you'd be encouraged to stick around in each world and actually do the
sidequests and events to level up faster, rather than just speedrunning through
the campaign to get to mayhem mode for its drastically increased experience
gains.

So with exploration out of the way, let's dive into the combat.
Kinesthetically, it's solid. Even though the game has a billion plus gun
combinations, the highly varied weapon animations and sound assets make them
feel mostly distinct. The gore and explosions can be pretty hilarious, even
though combat can become a visual clusterfuck as a result.  

When talking about the firearms in Borderlands 3, I think it's more helpful to
discuss the different gun manufacturers and their respective gimmicks, given
all of the possible random weapon combinations.  

Dahl makes standard military-styled munitions. All of their weapons, be it
their sniper rifles, pistols, or SMGs offer up low recoil and high accuracy,
allowing you to easily score consecutive critical hits. So long as you're
precise with your headshots, Dahl's weapons will deal solid DPS and have
reasonable ammo consumption. 

Their unique gimmick is their variable optics and firing patterns, making their
weapons versatile in mid to long ranged combat. For example, your assault rifle
can be fully automatic, equipped with a reflex sight for targeting nearby
enemies. You can then turn it into a semiautomatic rifle with a scope for
sniping.  Excluding some legendaries with fixed parts, this is all controlled
by random chance, so you can get less desirable combinations like double burst
fire. Overall, while Dahl tends to make unexciting weapons, they're solid
workhorses and are useful throughout the entire campaign.

On the opposite end of the spectrum, we have Tediore, the king of wacky
gimmicks. Excluding a few legendaries, their firearms' stats are rather
pathetic, being below par across the board.

However, it's in their unique reload gimmick that they truly shine. Instead of
swapping magazines like every other manufacturer, your vault hunter will throw
away their gun, with a new one being digitally-reconstructed in their hands
shortly afterwards. The firearm you discarded explodes upon contact with an
enemy or automatically after a few seconds, with its damage scaling off of the
reserve ammunation in the magazine at time of reload. Therefore, I think it's
best to view these guns as grenades, since you'll fire off one round and chuck
the gun at a pack of enemies. 

Overall, Tediore is hit or miss. While their reload gimmick is fun and offers
up a nice change of pace from other weapon manufacturers, you can't really use
their guns are conventional firearms due to their low overall damage.
Additionally, a single reload explosion can easily consume dozens of rounds,
which quickly chews through your reserve ammunition. They also deal
self-damage, so a poorly thrown explosion can easily kill you. 

Jakobs makes spaghetti western-themed firearms. All of their guns boast
exceptional base damage, at the expense of having high recoil and lacking
elemental variants. Of all of the weapon manufacturers, they have the least
exciting weapon gimmick. Firearms boast enhanced critical damage, and upon
impact, the bullet will ricochet to a nearby enemy. 

Despite their uninteresting gimmick, Jakobs is probably my favorite manufacturer in the game. 

Let's address the elephant in the room: the bugs. For a game that's over six
months old, Borderlands 3 is a disaster. A small subset of the issues
I've had are: losing hours of saved progress, frequent crashes to desktop,
performance hitching, and unreliable multiplayer.

CONCLUSIONS:

Overall, I've got mixed feelings on Borderlands 3. On one hand, it's nice to
see drastic improvements to combat flow alongside many needed QOL tweaks. It's
the first time I can say that I've genuinely enjoyed the gunplay. On the other
hand, the series still masturbates to its awful meme-ridden humor, to the
detriment of the pacing. Borderlands does not need dank memes to be enjoyable,
as the gameplay mostly stands on its own, but Gearbox still feels obliged to
include them for some reason.  Also, the current endgame is a complete mess
right now, as mayhem 2.0 is a bullet-spongey grindfest that forces you to
repeat the same content ad naseum. 

Ultimately, it seems like Gearbox is conflicted in its vision, as it can't
decide if it wants a traditional campaign with "wacky" humor or a diablo-esque
grindfest, with the current game being unsatisfying in both respects. But hey,
maybe fourth time's the charm.
